The Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction today presented by the
Permian Basin Science Fiction Association.
This is David Cruz, Daryl Lange, and David Carson.
The subject of this program is robots and mechanical men.
Along with aliens and space travel, I think robots are one of the most stock of all science
fiction concepts. For some people, they're probably synonymous with science fiction.
We see robots throughout the entire history of science fiction.
Sometimes they're a danger to man, their creator, and sometimes a benevolent and faithful helper.
Today, we're exposed to them continually in the movies and on TV.
And I think that's because they can be so fascinatingly visual and noisy, with glowing
red eyes, squeaks, clicks, hums, whirs, and representation of media robots also make good
toys to sell to kids. But as a concept and good science fiction literature,
they allow for some deep and insightful examinations of the human condition.
One author states that the value of robot stories is that in dealing with the man-made
version of humanity, the science fiction writer is lured into considering the nature of man
in its deepest aspects.
Before we go into it any further, we might stop and define what a robot is and perhaps
differentiate a robot from several other words that are used to describe non-human but humanoid
creatures.
Right. I think first of all that a robot is obviously something created, a mechanical
artifact made of artificial materials like metal, plastic, rubber, wires, tubes, hydraulic
fluids, whatever. It's mobile, self-contained, self-propelled, whether it uses legs, wheels,
treads, or some kind of anti-gravity device. It may or may not look like a man, though
it can think to some degree.
The basic differences between a robot and an android are the materials with which they're
built. An android is constructed of organic or living material. An android can be human
in form. In fact, it can be human in form in every possible manner.
Another word and category that we might also touch on is cyborg. A cyborg is not the same
as either a robot or android. Cyborg is like what the $6 million dollar man was, a combination
of machine with a man's mind. This can be either minimal like a mechanical hand, in
some senses, people with prosthetic devices could almost be called a cyborg, or it can
go on to the extremes of an entire body made up of metal and plastics and things with a
mind of a human being.
The idea of a man-like machine, an automaton or robot, as we mentioned before, is one of
the oldest of all science fiction themes, one of the classic concepts, and it goes all
the way back to Greek times. King Minos of Crete had a bronze giant named Thalus, made
by the craftsman Dedalus, which Minos used to guard and patrol the island. Later in the
16th century, Jewish legend developed the figure of the Golem. Though the Golem was made
of clay, he could be brought to life and was a precursor of robots.
Rossum's Universal Robots, or otherwise known as RUR, a Czechoslovakian play by Carol
Czopek, is not the first use of robots in literature, but is the first use of the word
robot. The word is derived from a word robata, meaning compulsory labor, and robotnik, meaning
workman. The play dealt with robots that discover emotion and ultimately rebel against their
masters.
In the prelude to a collection of short stories by Isaac Asimov, eight stories from the rest
of the robots, he mentions another story that seems to blend into this robot fabric that
is being weaved into the modern robot stories. He mentions the novel Frankenstein by Mary
Shelley as indicative of the kind of sociological background that became the robot in later
stories. Here we have the age-old dream of man to create another life form himself, but
this goes against all of his morals and most all of the religions who say that God is the
only one who can create a life form. So then when mankind does create this life form, it
turns on him and eventually destroys both itself and the people who created it. This,
of course, is the idea behind Frankenstein. What Isaac Asimov decided to do was to take
all of the robot stories that he had read, which were all Frankenstein complex stories,
and try something different, right one where the robots would not be necessarily evil.
Yeah, it's interesting that book Frankenstein, I think a lot of people identify that as the
first science fiction novel that was published back in the early 19th century, but I would
say probably the first modern robot story was published in 1938 by Lester Del Rey entitled
Helen Alloy. Now the early robots, I think most of them were sort of mindless machines.
Sometimes like Frankenstein, they got out of control and they often became a menace, but
the story Helen Alloy changed that. She was a beautiful humanoid robot that was built by
two inventors. And when they were constructing her, they accidentally gave her the emotion
of love. And so logically, she fell in love with one of her creators. She marries him
and they live a happy life together until he dies. And then she destroys herself because
she loved him so much. It's a very sentimental story, but it's probably kind of identified
as the first one where the robot is a sensitive creature, not simply a mindless automaton out
to destroy humanity or turn on its creators. Jack Williamson has done a lot of work in
this area too with robots, humanoids, androids and so forth. And he has one of the classics
entitled with folded hands. And that would have to be characterized as a dystopian robot
story, the kind where the machine doesn't actually turn on its creator, but it does
something that is going to be very harmful to the human race.
One of the cornerstones that the robots in the novel operate on are in fact the cornerstone
is they are to guard men from harm and in guarding men from harm, they deny man from
any sort of creative, most intellectual, and most pleasurable pursuits that a man would
have.
Yeah, they won't let people drive cars, for instance, because there's a possibility of
a wreck. They won't let them play certain games or sports because they could get hurt.
Almost any activity that we consider to be normal is denied by the robots and they're
there to enforce it so that people symbolically have to sit there with folded hands. They
can't do anything.
Yeah, there is no recourse against the robots.
Man is created, in this case, a being that succeeds too well.
So it's sort of an irony to it. Right, man has created the perfect machine, one that
can do everything for him, and it does so much for him that there's a danger that man
is going to become extinct almost.
Also, there's an interesting group of stories, I think, that are robot cultures, or cultures
of robots, or societies are formed, and they outlive humanity.
Many authors who see that the human race is causing itself a great deal of trouble, say,
with weapons, with nuclear warheads, with using up the environment.
Will conceive of robots as outliving man, that man has created the robots, he becomes
extinct and the robots take over.
A few of those stories can be seen in Clifford Symax's collection, City, where man really
have blasted themselves out of existence and the robots they create are there to carry
on civilization.
John W. Campbell has a couple stories published in the early 30s, Twilight and Night, where
millions of years in the future human beings have degenerated.
Their machines have become so powerful and so all-encompassing that man no longer has
the capacity to be a man.
It's almost an extension of Williamson's unfolded hands.
And so man have degenerated into mindless beings, and the robots run the world.
And one other that should be mentioned, I think, is Brian Aldous's classic story,
But Who Can Replace a Man in 1958.
And the interesting part of that story is that the whole thing is written from the robot's
point of view.
Almost all men are gone, and the robots are wondering, what do we do now?
How can we carry on without them?
And you see them working to form a viable society now that man is gone.
This same theme is taken by other authors in a humorous tone.
For instance, Siberiad by Stanislaw Lim.
It's one of those inimitable works by him that's purely a good time to read.
The entire piece is a social satire, the tradition of Swift, but it's in the style of science
fantasy.
The characters are all robots of a high degree of complexity.
In fact, these are the robots that men created eons ago who have now taken their own initiative
as man declined.
These robots have evolved on their own into a legitimate life form and have advanced so
far that they don't even remember their origin in mankind.
One particularly funny passage is the recitation by one of the characters, a robot of course,
of the theory of evolution a la robotics, which begins with Adam striking Adam in the
formless darkness to create current, which gave rise to proto-mechanoans and so forth,
not even omitting the missing clink.
The digs that we pale faces as the robots refer to humans are all in good humor and the robots
themselves are all original and hilariously civilized.
Another robot novel in the humorous vein is Robots Have No Tales by Henry Kuttner.
Gallagher, the protagonist in the book, has a rather unusual creative abilities, but only
when he's completely drunk.
This presents him with a myriad of problems when he sobers up because he has to figure
out what he invented and why.
One of his inventions in the novel Robots Have No Tales is a robot that will not respond
to any of his commands.
All the robot will do is sit and admire himself in a mirror.
Gallagher tricks the robot into hypnotizing itself in order to greater admire its beauty,
then asks it,
Why did I create you?
The robot reaches over and picks up a beer can and opens it without spilling a drop and
hands it to Gallagher.
The robot, as it turns out, is the world's most sophisticated beer can opener.
But of course, whenever the subject of robots comes up, there's only one name that you need
to come down to to cover the field, and that's Isaac Asimov.
The name is familiar to all science fiction readers because Asimov is one of the most
prolific writers of all time.
He's written over 220 books and he's still going strong.
He's one of the few science fiction authors who is also a scientist with a PhD in biochemistry.
His first science fiction story was published in 1939 for John W. Campbell.
And though he's written on almost all science fiction themes such as time travel, galactic
empires, space exploration, and so forth, he is certainly best known for his robot stories.
In fact, Asimov defined and molded the robot story in such books as iRobot, The Caves of
Steel, The Naked Son, and the rest of the robots.
As we mentioned earlier, Asimov's main purpose in dealing with robots was to create robots
that were not necessarily evil.
And he got around the automatic destructive qualities of robots by creating three laws
that were built in to every robot that humankind created.
Law number one, a robot may not injure a human being or through inaction allow a human being
to come to harm.
Law number two, a robot must obey the orders given by human beings except where such orders
will conflict with the first law.
Law number three, a robot must protect its own existence as long as such protection does
not conflict with the first or second law.
Asimov invented what he called a positronic brain for these robots.
It was made of platinum or rydium, a sponge made of those elements.
And the brain paths were marked out by the production and destruction of positrons, hence
the term positronic brain.
And ingrained in this brain are the three laws of robotics, which a robot has to obey
because it's part of his psyche.
The first novel that Asimov wrote concerning the robot culture that he invented in I A
Robot was the novel Caves of Steel written in 1953.
Here we have a society of earthmen who have gone beyond the huge cities of today.
They've taken this to the extreme.
They've enclosed the cities in domes.
Everyone lives within the realm of the cities.
The outside lands are for farming and are run mostly by robots.
The people have gotten so used to this kind of life that they can't even face the outdoors.
They wouldn't know what to do with an open sky and wind in their face.
These huge cities are indeed Caves of Steel and that's where the title of the novel comes
from.
Earth has an overpopulation problem at this time.
I think the major cities on earth or all of them have about millions of people in them
and on earth has eight, nine billion people on it.
Their protein level is difficult to keep it up.
They have to subsist on yeast and yeast becomes the basics of all their diet.
And they've evolved really a very insular culture.
As you said, they're afraid of the outside world.
They have many fears in fact and they seem to have comfort only in their cities where
they can huddle like animals in a cave or something of that sort.
At one time in the past they colonized other planets but the colonists eventually overthrew
them and are forcing the earth people to stay on earth.
I think the earth people kind of want to stay there because by this time they're afraid
too, almost of leaving their cities.
They do have connections with the colonists who are now called spacers and the spacers
are their trading connection with other planets.
Yeah, the spacers are almost totally opposite of the remaining earthmen in that they live
in open spaces, they hate the indoors, they're extremely careful about contacting the earthmen
because they have eliminated almost all the diseases, earth-born diseases.
And they're very fastidious and when they meet a real earthman they are extremely careful
in doing so.
The earthman tends to take that as an insult, being superior to the earthman.
But in reality though the spacer allows that to happen because he wants to maintain an
image of superiority, in reality the spacer is afraid of the earthman because the earthman
can kill him with the germs that he carries.
And as the book begins and we have sort of a conflict here, we have the earthman and
their cities, you know, very insular and very avoiding any kind of contact with the spacers.
But the spacers have one little enclave on earth to keep their contact open.
And there's some sort of plot going underneath the surface.
The spacers want earth to open up.
They think that the only way the human race is going to progress and go forth is for the
both branches to reunite.
Now we don't know this at the beginning but that's the basic setup that Asimov has put
into the novel.
And of course into that he's injected the attitude toward robots of the respective branches
of earthmen.
The people on earth use robots but they use them disparagingly.
They don't like robots even though they do use them.
That's the old Frankenstein complex that Asimov talked about where they're afraid they're
going to lose their jobs to robots.
They think they're being demeaned by them.
And the protagonist of the book Lige Bailey seems to hate robots.
He'll curse at them, he'll try to avoid them, he'll get mad when they talk to him.
And that seems to be the attitude of many earthmen.
There have been riots in fact where they have trapped a robot and just torn it apart completely.
The robots represent the spacers to the earthmen and they react against the robots because
they can't react against the spacemen.
And the spacers have got better robots.
They appreciate robots, they're not afraid of them.
And they've developed some very high class models.
In fact the conflict of the story involves the contact and the forcing of the protagonist
Lige Bailey to work with one of these extremely advanced robots.
This robot is so advanced that he looks human and can be mistaken for a human by even experts
in robotics.
Yeah Bailey and the robot are both policemen.
There's been a murder in space town that the space are on clay on earth and the spacers
think it's an earthmen who's done it.
And so they send their robot policemen to work with the earth policemen Lige Bailey to see
if they can figure out who's done it and avoid the conflict between the spacers and the earthmen.
And so the book becomes a detective story.
It's one of the few science fiction detective stories that has been written.
John W. Campbell one time said nobody could write a science fiction detective story.
And as them off in retaliation to that wrote Kayser Steel which is a science fiction detective story.
Of course others have been written since then.
For instance the long arm of Gil Hamilton with Larry Nivens works.
I think one interesting part about Kayser Steel is the way that Lige Bailey little by
little overcomes his original hatred and fear and loathing even of this robot.
This R. Daniel Oliva with the R standing for robot.
In fact he's very put out at first because he doesn't know that Oliva is a robot.
But as they progress as they work together Lige comes to respect him and they solve the
case both of them working together when it looks like they might not.
But at the last minute they do and Lige comes to understand what Asimov I think wants people
to understand that robots can be beneficial and all they are is machines.
That they're not to be feared.
Daniel not only works with Lige Bailey but he also ends up living with him because of
the restricted quarters on earth and that leads to several conflicts in Bailey's own
personal life.
But both Bailey and his wife eventually learn to appreciate the robot because he has many
admirable qualities about him.
I think we could probably say the overall theme of the book is not so much the the
robot himself or the use of robots but the optimistic notion that mankind has to expand
he has to keep expanding.
Earth long ago before the novel started had colonized part of the solar system.
They had retreated because they were then repulsed by their original colonists and now
they're in solar they won't leave the earth they're afraid they're afraid even of the
open air.
The spacers realize that something has to be done.
Earth has to open up again.
And I would say the overall theme of the book therefore becomes the avoidance of stagnation
the solving of overpopulation and food problems by opening up the earth and allowing earthmen
to colonize again in large numbers.
And Asimov carries that further in the book which followed Caves of Steel which was called
the Naked Sun.
In the Naked Sun Lige Bailey and Daniel are once again united on a spacer planet where
a murder has taken place and they are asked to solve this murder.
Here we get a first glimpse of the spacer life which is totally different from the life
on earth.
Here there are 20,000 people on this planet and that's all.
They live each one in a house by themselves with a great amount of land surrounding them
the land devoted to agriculture.
And each one of these people has lived this way all his life and for generations so long
that they abhor contact with each other as much as the earth people abhor insulation
from others.
Even when people are married and live in the same house together they live in separate
wings of the house.
They don't stay together they don't eat together they don't really interact together with
any great degree at all.
The communication and interaction that they do indulge in occurs through the use of a
very sophisticated holographic setup where one room can be joined as it were to another
room by means of audio-visual link.
Two people would seem to be in the same room together but in actuality maybe half the planet
apart.
Lige has got a couple basic problems in this novel.
In the first place he's still a detective he has to solve a murder another murder.
Secondly he has a severe personal problem in that he's out of earth he's out of his
caves of steel for the first time and the open space is terrifying.
You know the first time he's not only outside of the caves of steel he's left the planet
and he's got to solve his murder under this overcoming his whole training his whole upbringing
which has been to avoid the outside world.
And yet Lige has been one of the very few people who's begun to see the point that humans
should begin to learn to get back to the open spaces and work with robots.
He makes an attempt a very brave attempt for him to experience the outside and he's thinking
that this is the one time that a human may get this chance.
The spacers don't want to let him do that and it becomes a very strange conflict within
Lige himself that he's fighting not only himself but the spacers and also that urge to find
out what the open spaces and the spacer planets are really like.
But I think by the end of the book we believe that not only does he solve the murder we
know that but we also believe that the theme that we saw beginning in Cage of Steel is
going to come about that Earth will open up, that Earth people who live in these Cages
of Steel are going to realize that they can't do that forever they have to get out and we
somehow suspect that the two branches of the human race the spacers and the earthmen are
going to blend and they will explore and colonize further with the help of robots.
Through the 40s and 50s and 60s and 70s, Asimov Robot stories for Science Fiction magazines.
That's amazing over four decades he continued with the same themes, the same ideas.
Mostly he'd center on an American company entitled U.S. Robotics, United States Robotics.
And characters recurred in the stories particularly Susan Calvin who was a Robo-psychologist,
the term invented by Asimov.
And basically the stories would center on the problems, the developments, the progress
and so forth involved with robots and overcoming people's fear of them.
Overall I think we see that he's not only writing about robots but he's examining humanity
as Amov is.
As we noted earlier, a robot story in a sense reflects on human nature.
It gives man something to measure himself against.
And one of his latest stories and I think probably one of his most profound, Asimov works at
defining what is a human being by using robots.
That story is thou art mindful of him and in that story the head of U.S. Robotics has
come up with a problem.
His company is going into default if he cannot come up with a new product with which to sustain
his company.
So he takes his top flight robot George Ten and asks him how can they come up with something
to sustain the company.
And George Ten asks for some help from George Nine and they go into a room and start thinking.
And eventually what they come up with is not what the head of U.S. Robotics is after,
what they come up with is a way of getting around the three laws in that George Nine
believes that George Ten is such a high caliber of being that he thinks of him as being human.
And if George Ten is thought of as being human then robots are now human and can get around
the three laws.
Right, if it comes down to a choice of whether they should obey one of themselves, a robot
or a human being, they can pick themselves.
Since between themselves George Nine and Ten have worked out that they are more than human
beings.
So when it comes to a judgment call they can go with the robots rather than the humans.
So they've gotten around the three laws.
In the Fritz Lying film Metropolis in 1926 there was the first use of a humanoid type
robot used in the cinema.
The robot is eventually changed where its appearance is totally of that of one of the
major characters in the movie, a young girl.
And then the robot and the guise of the young girl is used to incite a riot on the planet
which eventually leads to a partial takeover of the city.
This is really a very good demonstration of the Frankenstein complex used in literature
up until that time transposed to the cinema.
In 1951 one of the classic science fiction films by Robert Wise is The Day the Earth
Stood Still.
And that movie contains one of the first identifiable robots in the cinema.
These two aliens arrive on earth.
One, an alien, a biological creature, and one a robot named Gort.
And Gort has gone down in the cinema as one of the classic robots.
And probably the first one that people could name and remember.
The movie was taken from a short story called Farewell to the Master by Harry Bates.
And the movie Gort is a standard robot taking instructions from the lead character, Klaatu,
played by Michael Rennie.
But in the book they have sort of a switch on that, on a theme.
The robot is the master and the human alien with him is really the subject.
When the human half of the alien team is killed they go to the robot and they say,
well we're sorry that your master has been killed.
And the robot turns to them and says, well he wasn't the master, I am the master.
But these were not brought out in the film.
There are some important themes in that movie, but one of them I think is a comment on humanity.
The Klaatu and Gort come as peaceful creatures to contact and to establish relations.
The humans start shooting and ultimately Gort responds with violently.
But I'm not sure we can blame him.
I think perhaps the movie maker met us to see Gort in some sympathetic light.
His master has been killed, he is responding violently.
But it's certainly not the Frankenstein complex operating.
Once Klaatu is killed, Gort automatically goes on a destructive rampage until he is stopped
with a certain set of commands which Klaatu is given to one of his friends on Earth.
And then Gort goes and finds Klaatu and brings him back to the spacecraft and ultimately brings
him back to life.
And they give a farewell speech to the scientists gathered around the spacecraft and then depart
the Earth.
Another classic movie in which we can recognize a popular robot is Forbidden Planet.
In 1956 when this movie was released, the audiences were exposed to a new robot known
as Robbie the Robot.
Most people still recognize Robbie the Robot.
The actual prop they used, the robot, is still in existence and is used in all sorts of things
from commercials to appearances and in shopping centers and everything else.
This is one of the more popular I think of the robot characters that's been portrayed
in cinema or in books.
I think a lot of people when they conceive of a robot, when they get an image of one,
they remember Robbie because they saw that movie.
And it is one of the few movies where a robot has a major part in the motion picture.
He is one of the main characters in the picture.
For me Robbie is sort of a precursor or a preview of the, oh the cute person little
robots that we see in later movies like Star Wars with his little beeps and clicks and so
forth.
This is David Cruz, Daryl Lange and David Carson.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a presentation of the Permian Basin Science
Fiction Association in conjunction with KOCV FM and Odessa College, Odessa, Texas.
And yet he's a hardware robot.
He's nuts and bolts and light bulbs and flashing lights.
Well some of the robots in Star Wars like C-3PO and R2D2.
And we might touch on several other films and television shows that have included robots
in a major position in, in, in cut it after robots.
For instance Silent Running in 1972 Doug Trumbull's film where we see the three small robots that
are in charge of the, of the forest ships.
Huey Dewey and Louie.
The, oh yeah.
The Alien, oops.
The robot that we see in the, in the 1979 movie Alien is also an interesting one.
Ash who appears to be a man and all the, the people on board the ship don't realize that he's a robot
until he's destroyed and comes apart and they can see the, the mechanism is an interesting one also.
Bob and the cable.
And I guess we should also mention Black Hole.
This is an example I think of, of the poor taste in, in the presentation of robots.
This is like we've said in concerning with, like we've said in reference to aliens.
Here you, they've just given us a human in a funny suit.
These are not really robots and not portrayed realistically.
They're, they're just funny creatures in, in funny suits.
I think they tried to build on Star Wars there with, with cute little robots and they just overdid the cuteness.
A movie, very recent movie entitled Saturn III which otherwise wasn't too impressive to me at least,
had a fairly interesting robot in the name Hector, which is what I think a robot would look like.
It was the creature himself at least was well done even though the movie I don't think was a very successful one.
We haven't really talked about Star Wars.
We mentioned it earlier. That's everybody knows about Star Wars.
Yeah, no, no. Okay.
Television has also had its,
television has also,
television has also had its host of robots.
The, one of the, one of the main characters in Lost in Space was a robot.
Lost in Space produced in the late 60s.
We aren't really given any background on, on the robot.
We don't even know what its name is.
It's only referred to as a robot in the British BBC series, Doctor Who.
Doctor Who's, one of Doctor Who's main nemesis,
Husser Plurals nemesis is nemesis.
And the BBC,
and the BBC,
and the BBC series, Doctor Who, one of Doctor Who's main nemesis,
sis, I forgot it, nemesis.
And the BBC series, Doctor Who, one of Doctor Who's,
one of Doctor Who's main nemesis are the Daleks,
which are a alien robot race,
which in various unsundry times through the series tries to come and take over the Earth.
And one of the latest versions of robots are the Cylons used in Battlestar Galactica.
And there they're the ultimate enemies of mankind,
pure hostility out to exterminate the human race.
Segway, segway, segway, ending.
Another famous ending by D. Cruz.
Short and sweet.
Whether the robots of reality will correspond with those of fiction remains to be seen.
But science fiction authors will, we hope, continue to tantalize us with stories of the mechanical men,
the iron and steel and plastic men,
who are really a reflection of ourselves as man attempts to create life in his own image.
Okay, let's rewind it, let's go home.